README.md, before:

# drift

**Real-time codebase health dashboard with AI diagnostics.**

drift watches your Go codebase in real-time, detects code health degradation, and uses AI to diagnose problems and suggest fixes. Think Datadog for your codebase, in your terminal.

```
┌─────────────────────── DRIFT ────────────────────────┐
│                                                       │
│            ████████████░░░░░░  87/100                 │
│            ▲ +3 from last commit                      │
│                                                       │
├────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────┤
│  COMPLEXITY            │  DEPENDENCIES                │
│  ──────────            │  ────────────                 │
│  ⚠ parse.go:47   32   │  ✓ bubbletea    v1.3  current│
│  ⚠ analyze.go:12 28   │  ⚠ cobra        v1.8  34d   │
│    main.go:8     12   │  ✗ go-git       v5.8  180d  │
├────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────┤
│  BOUNDARIES            │  ACTIVITY                    │
│  ──────────            │  ────────                    │
│  ✗ api → db (3 hits)   │  14:32:05  parse.go modified │
│  ✓ cmd → pkg           │  14:31:52  go.mod updated    │
├────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────┤
│ [tab] navigate  [d] diagnose  [r] refresh  [q] quit  │
└───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Features

- **Live Dashboard** — Full-screen TUI that updates in real-time as you edit code
- **Cyclomatic Complexity** — Identifies your most complex functions using Go AST analysis
- **Dependency Freshness** — Checks every dependency against the Go module proxy
- **Architecture Boundaries** — Define import rules and catch violations instantly
- **Dead Code Detection** — Finds exported functions with zero callers
- **AI Diagnostics** — Press `d` to get AI-powered analysis via Claude or GPT-4o
- **Health Score** — Weighted 0-100 score with animated transitions
- **CI-Friendly** — `drift snapshot` outputs JSON for pipeline integration

## Install

```bash
go install github.com/greatnessinabox/drift@latest
```

Or build from source:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/greatnessinabox/drift.git
cd drift
go build ./cmd/drift/
```

## Quick Start

```bash
# Run the live dashboard in any Go project
cd your-go-project
drift

# Generate a terminal-formatted report
drift report

# Output JSON for CI pipelines
drift snapshot

# Create a config file
drift init
```

## Configuration

Create a `.drift.yaml` in your project root:

```yaml
# Directories to exclude
exclude:
  - vendor
  - .git

# Metric weights (must sum to 1.0)
weights:
  complexity: 0.30
  deps: 0.20
  boundaries: 0.20
  dead_code: 0.15
  coverage: 0.15

# Architecture boundary rules
boundaries:
  - deny: "pkg/api -> internal/db"
  - deny: "cmd -> internal/tui"

# AI diagnostics (optional)
ai:
  provider: anthropic  # or "openai"
  model: ""            # uses sensible defaults

# Thresholds
thresholds:
  max_complexity: 15
  max_stale_days: 90
  min_score: 70
```

## AI Diagnostics

Press `d` in the dashboard to trigger an AI diagnosis. Supports:

- **Anthropic Claude** — Set `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` env var
- **OpenAI GPT-4o** — Set `OPENAI_API_KEY` env var

Configure your provider in `.drift.yaml` under `ai.provider`.

The AI analyzes your worst-scoring metrics and provides specific, actionable recommendations with file and function names.

## Keyboard Shortcuts

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `tab` | Navigate between panels |
| `shift+tab` | Navigate backwards |
| `d` | Run AI diagnosis |
| `r` | Force full re-analysis |
| `q` / `ctrl+c` | Quit |
| `esc` | Close diagnosis overlay |

## How It Works

1. **Analysis Engine** — Parses all `.go` files using `go/ast` to calculate cyclomatic complexity, detect dead code, and map import graphs
2. **Dependency Checker** — Reads `go.mod` and queries the Go module proxy for latest versions
3. **File Watcher** — Uses `fsnotify` with 200ms debounce for instant feedback on file changes
4. **Health Score** — Weighted average of all metrics, with configurable thresholds
5. **TUI** — Built with [Bubble Tea](https://github.com/charmbracelet/bubbletea) and [Lip Gloss](https://github.com/charmbracelet/lipgloss) for a beautiful terminal experience

## Copilot CLI Integration

drift ships with a custom GitHub Copilot agent profile and an agent skill:

- **`.github/agents/drift-dev.agent.md`** — Turns Copilot CLI into a drift development expert
- **`.github/skills/go-health-analysis/`** — Reusable skill for Go code health analysis

These work with GitHub Copilot CLI, VS Code Copilot, and the Copilot coding agent.

## CI Integration

```yaml
# GitHub Actions example
- name: Check codebase health
  run: |
    go install github.com/greatnessinabox/drift@latest
    SCORE=$(drift snapshot | jq '.score.total')
    if (( $(echo "$SCORE < 70" | bc -l) )); then
      echo "Health score $SCORE is below threshold"
      exit 1
    fi
```

## Built With

- [Bubble Tea](https://github.com/charmbracelet/bubbletea) — TUI framework
- [Lip Gloss](https://github.com/charmbracelet/lipgloss) — Terminal styling
- [Cobra](https://github.com/spf13/cobra) — CLI framework
- [fsnotify](https://github.com/fsnotify/fsnotify) — File system notifications
- [Anthropic SDK](https://github.com/anthropics/anthropic-sdk-go) — Claude AI integration
- [OpenAI SDK](https://github.com/openai/openai-go) — GPT integration

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Enhances codebase analysis and TUI presentation
Adds sparklines to the TUI to visualize historical trends
Improves AI diagnostics by including code snippets
Refactors analyzer to support multiple languages
Adds demo recordings to showcase drift
Adds documentation for copilot integration

README.md, after:

# drift

**Real-time codebase health dashboard with AI diagnostics.**

drift watches your Go codebase in real-time, detects code health degradation, and uses AI to diagnose problems and suggest fixes. Think Datadog for your codebase, in your terminal.

```
┌─────────────────────── DRIFT ────────────────────────┐
│                                                       │
│            ████████████░░░░░░  87/100                 │
│            ▲ +3 from last commit                      │
│                                                       │
├────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────┤
│  COMPLEXITY            │  DEPENDENCIES                │
│  ──────────            │  ────────────                 │
│  ⚠ parse.go:47   32   │  ✓ bubbletea    v1.3  current│
│  ⚠ analyze.go:12 28   │  ⚠ cobra        v1.8  34d   │
│    main.go:8     12   │  ✗ go-git       v5.8  180d  │
├────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────┤
│  BOUNDARIES            │  ACTIVITY                    │
│  ──────────            │  ────────                    │
│  ✗ api → db (3 hits)   │  14:32:05  parse.go modified │
│  ✓ cmd → pkg           │  14:31:52  go.mod updated    │
├────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────┤
│ [tab] navigate  [d] diagnose  [r] refresh  [q] quit  │
└───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Features

- **Live Dashboard** — Full-screen TUI that updates in real-time as you edit code
- **Sparkline Trends** — Visualize health metrics over the last 10 commits with inline charts
- **Cyclomatic Complexity** — Identifies your most complex functions using Go AST analysis
- **Dependency Freshness** — Checks every dependency against the Go module proxy
- **Architecture Boundaries** — Define import rules and catch violations instantly
- **Dead Code Detection** — Finds exported functions with zero callers
- **AI Diagnostics** — Press `d` to get AI-powered analysis via Claude or GPT-4o
- **Health Score** — Weighted 0-100 score with animated transitions
- **CI-Friendly** — `drift snapshot` outputs JSON for pipeline integration

## Install

```bash
go install github.com/greatnessinabox/drift@latest
```

Or build from source:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/greatnessinabox/drift.git
cd drift
go build ./cmd/drift/
```

## Quick Start

```bash
# Run the live dashboard in any Go project
cd your-go-project
drift

# Generate a terminal-formatted report
drift report

# Output JSON for CI pipelines
drift snapshot

# Check health score and fail if below threshold (for CI)
drift check --fail-under 70

# Create a config file
drift init
```

## Configuration

Create a `.drift.yaml` in your project root:

```yaml
# Directories to exclude
exclude:
  - vendor
  - .git

# Metric weights (must sum to 1.0)
weights:
  complexity: 0.30
  deps: 0.20
  boundaries: 0.20
  dead_code: 0.15
  coverage: 0.15

# Architecture boundary rules
boundaries:
  - deny: "pkg/api -> internal/db"
  - deny: "cmd -> internal/tui"

# AI diagnostics (optional)
ai:
  provider: anthropic  # or "openai"
  model: ""            # uses sensible defaults

# Thresholds
thresholds:
  max_complexity: 15
  max_stale_days: 90
  min_score: 70
```

## AI Diagnostics

Press `d` in the dashboard to trigger an AI diagnosis. Supports:

- **Anthropic Claude** — Set `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` env var
- **OpenAI GPT-4o** — Set `OPENAI_API_KEY` env var

Configure your provider in `.drift.yaml` under `ai.provider`.

The AI analyzes your worst-scoring metrics and provides specific, actionable recommendations with file and function names.

## Keyboard Shortcuts

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `tab` | Navigate between panels |
| `shift+tab` | Navigate backwards |
| `d` | Run AI diagnosis |
| `r` | Force full re-analysis |
| `q` / `ctrl+c` | Quit |
| `esc` | Close diagnosis overlay |

## How It Works

1. **Analysis Engine** — Parses all `.go` files using `go/ast` to calculate cyclomatic complexity, detect dead code, and map import graphs
2. **Dependency Checker** — Reads `go.mod` and queries the Go module proxy for latest versions
3. **File Watcher** — Uses `fsnotify` with 200ms debounce for instant feedback on file changes
4. **History Analyzer** — Uses `go-git` to walk commit history and generate sparkline trends
5. **Health Score** — Weighted average of all metrics, with configurable thresholds
6. **TUI** — Built with [Bubble Tea](https://github.com/charmbracelet/bubbletea) and [Lip Gloss](https://github.com/charmbracelet/lipgloss) for a beautiful terminal experience

## Copilot CLI Integration

drift ships with a custom GitHub Copilot agent profile and an agent skill:

- **`.github/agents/drift-dev.agent.md`** — Turns Copilot CLI into a drift development expert
- **`.github/skills/go-health-analysis/`** — Reusable skill for Go code health analysis

These work with GitHub Copilot CLI, VS Code Copilot, and the Copilot coding agent.

## CI Integration

Use the `drift check` command with `--fail-under` flag for easy CI integration:

```yaml
# GitHub Actions example
- name: Check codebase health
  run: |
    go install github.com/greatnessinabox/drift@latest
    drift check --fail-under 70
```

Or use the `snapshot` command for more advanced workflows:

```yaml
# Advanced CI integration with JSON output
- name: Check codebase health
  run: |
    go install github.com/greatnessinabox/drift@latest
    SCORE=$(drift snapshot | jq '.score.total')
    if (( $(echo "$SCORE < 70" | bc -l) )); then
      echo "Health score $SCORE is below threshold"
      exit 1
    fi
```

## Built With

- [Bubble Tea](https://github.com/charmbracelet/bubbletea) — TUI framework
- [Lip Gloss](https://github.com/charmbracelet/lipgloss) — Terminal styling
- [Cobra](https://github.com/spf13/cobra) — CLI framework
- [fsnotify](https://github.com/fsnotify/fsnotify) — File system notifications
- [go-git](https://github.com/go-git/go-git) — Git repository access for history trends
- [Anthropic SDK](https://github.com/anthropics/anthropic-sdk-go) — Claude AI integration
- [OpenAI SDK](https://github.com/openai/openai-go) — GPT integration

## License

MIT
